# ESA and NASA Codes
Codes used in the 
- ESA Hackathon
- NASA Internship with NASA Ames Research Center

### ESA Hackathon
Introduction: NASA’s GeneLab repository provides an extensive collection of multi-omics data, including gene expression and methylation from spaceflight experiments. However, integrating these multidimensional datasets to extract insights about how spaceflight conditions such as microgravity and radiation impact biological systems remains a major challenge. To begin to address this challenge, we developed and applied a novel AI-based integration method, the Compositional Variational Autoencoder (CoVAE), to simultaneously model and predict the biological impact of spaceflight conditions across multiple omics modalities.

Rationale: Traditional statistical methods are often inadequate for handling the multidimensionality of multi-omic data and they usually struggle to distinguish noise from experimental treatments. With increased experimental throughput, decrease in cost of generating omics data and a wide range of biological systems to test, there is a pressing need to develop deep computational approaches that can integrate, model, predict, interpret and guide the design of spaceflight experiments at the multi-omics scale.
Method: We processed normalized gene expression and raw DNA methylation data from Mus musculus. These were datasets with multiple experimental covariates, such as tissues, species, and treatment conditions from Rodent Research (RR-1, RR-2, and RR-8)  from NASA’s GeneLab. We developed Compositional Variational Autoencoder, a self-supervised representation learning architecture for integrating and predicting biological response to treatment. It compresses the high-dimensional omics data into a latent representation that captures underlying biological processes, while the compositional component allows for adjusting this latent space to simulate the effects of experimental confounders such as treatments, dosage and timing.

Results: Initial modeling using synthetic data demonstrated CoVAE’s ability to accurately predict treatment-induced changes in gene expression and methylation profiles across 2 different synthetic tissue profiles (MSE= 0.06 & R2 = 0.83). Encouraged by these results, the model was then applied to real RNA-Seq datasets from NASA's GeneLab from 192 samples and 46K trainable features (compiled from gene count, mission type, microgravity and radiation status). We could also infer tissue and species specific response within spaceflight data from our latent representation.

Conclusions: The autoencoder is capable of multi-omics data from multiple spaceflight experiments and predicts the impact of spaceflight conditions. Currently, we are limited by data size and computational power needed to feed our model with more datasets, but we already show promise by being able to predict the impact of different experimental treatments. However, our early success underscores the potential of AI-driven approaches for integrating, predicting, interpreting and prioritizing future spaceflight experiments.